Hey guys, Spirit of the Law here. Sometimes, new players get the idea that speed and maximizing little efficiencies are the most important things to focus on to improve. But as basic as it might sound, I think learning to make the correct decisions can be way more important than flawless execution. One of the easiest ways to start improving is understanding why some of the counters are much better than you might initially think.

For those of you who can consistently beat the moderate AI, you probably already know, at least most of the time, to stick to the main two or three counters for each unit to keep things simple. I recommend to any of you that are newer players that you should try the Art of War tutorials as a good double-check. They are dedicated just to picking counter units, which is a good test of whether or not you were paying attention.

One last note: unique unit counters are their own video and less important to learn at first. I also realize this is probably coming 20 years into it, starting with the archers.

Now, their most straightforward counter is the skirmisher. It might not be intuitive why someone throwing a spear is good against someone with a bow and arrow, but skirmishers have unusually high armor against ranged units and also have a secret attack bonus against archers in return, leading to really one-sided results while also being the cheaper and faster unit to make.

Another effective late encounter is the Mangonel or Onager. Archers tend to bunch up and stand still, and in the mid-game, the projectiles are slow enough that small groups of archers can dodge them if your opponent is paying attention.

Another class of really important counters are the Rams, not necessarily to attack the archers directly, but simply because archers prefer to attack the closest target possible, and Rams have incredibly high armor against ranged units. When placed in front of your other units, they end up soaking up the enemy archers' attacks and keep your units safe behind.

Next, specialized to fight infantry. So the normal archer counters of skirmishers and onagers still tend to do quite well. Cavalry can be okay if hand cannoneers or even archers, for that matter, are in small numbers. But the main thing is you want archers as well. So if skirmishers are so good against archers, then how do you counter them? Well, like archers, they have low HP and tend to stand in one spot. So onagers are again a great counter. Cavalry is also quite good because skirmishers have a minimum range, meaning they have to retreat from anything attacking them up close. You could argue that the militia-swordsmen line counters skirmishers, and they can certainly survive for a long time against them. But in both the early and late game, I think cavalry is the better choice if available.

Speaking of which, the two most common types of cavalry to see are the scout line and those. Both of them share a weakness to spearmen and camels thanks to some hidden bonus damage, which is increased as those units are upgraded. The spearmen line, in particular, is one of the hardest counters in the game, particularly because of how cheap spearmen are compared to cavalry. That said, when raiding, cavalry can sometimes use their speed to get away from spearmen. So defensively, at least having a few spearmen around your base is more useful than having a large group altogether.

One way to address the cavalry speed advantage is, of course, to make camels cost-effective. But at least they can chase down cavalry and force a proper one. One way that countering the scout line and the knight line differs massively is conversion. Not only does it take away one of your units, so a single conversion can end up costing your opponent two units if you end up using it effectively. The knight will sometimes be able to take out the monk in time, but quite often, you see experienced players delete their knights rather than give them up.

The scout and light cavalry line, on the other hand, has a hidden resistance to conversion. So it takes longer, plus they also have an attack against monks. In fact, they might be the best counter to monks and are commonly used on the map Arena, for example, to stop enemy monks from collecting relics.

When it comes to cavalry and in other ways, knights and light cavalry tend to have very similar counters. Before we move on, I do want to point out a slightly more advanced case where archers can be a situational counter to cavalry as well. Unlike some other strategy games where cavalry is an amazing counter, even against a much necessarily true in Age of Empires. If archers reach a critical mass where they are able to take out cavalry in a few focused shots, they end up doing quite well with some micromanagement. Whereas in small numbers, cavalry will consistently win out. Basically, it depends on the numbers on both sides.

But speaking of their love child, the cavalry archer. Now, they can be a very annoying raiding unit, no doubt. But on paper, they take bonus damage from any anti-cavalry or anti-archer unit. Like any archer, skirmishers are a great counter because of their bonus damage and armor. Plus, again, Mangonels and onagers are a solid choice as they are against most ranged units. I'll save that for the unique unit lists because cavalry archers are still classified as cavalry as well.

Pikemen also have bonus damage against them. Dodgy and good luck actually landing them solely. That said, camels are also a great counter because of their bonus damage. Plus, again, their speed, so they can actually chase them down. So camels are so universally good against cavalry while also being cavalry themselves. How do you counter those? Well, one small wrinkle is they actually resist anti-cavalry bonus damage. Spear units, though, in the long run, basically anything except cavalry and siege should actually do okay. The trade-off camels have for their anti-cavalry bonus is they have relatively low HP, attack, and armor compared to knights. So it turns out that archers can be a counter as well, given you have enough arrows. Quite as well as the knight line. So a combination of pikes and archers tends to do the trick.

Camels are also a good counter as well, like they are against basically any type of cavalry. The last type of cavalry is the elephant, and they are slightly different because of their high HP, which means archers have a hard time bringing them down. In that case, against spear units are a great choice, and they even get more bonus damage than normal. But you could also consider using scorpions, onagers, or even monks to exploit their slow movement. It sometimes feels like spears and camels are usually the main go-to units and useful at any level. Twofold, partly because they counter cheap cost makes them ubiquitous in the late game as a protection for siege.

The thing about spearmen, though, is they only fight cavalry. Basically, everything else, whether it be skirmishers, archers, or swordsmen, will handle them pretty easily. Skirmishers and archers are helped out by bonus damage, as well as being able to hit and run, while swordsmen just have much higher attack and win with raw stats. This is, in fact, the first time the swordsmen line has come up as a counter unit, and in fact, one of the units they counter well are warriors, thanks to some very generous hidden bonus damage.

Eagles have excellent armor against archers and their own small bonus damage against cavalry. So swordsmen are my preferred real-world rationale for why a swordsman would be strong against an Eagle warrior. And I remember this one being one of the least intuitive counters as I was learning the game. A side note here, actually, many of the infantry unique units also have hidden attack bonuses against Eagle warriors.

So now in that case, I think the best counter is the hand cannon. As I said already, hand cannons are a lot like archers but more specialized toward infantry, doing ten extra damage against them. Those are only available in the Imperial age, though, after researching chemistry. But before that, archers do a pretty good job. In feudal age, for example, archers are the main go-to counter against most infantry things, and swordsmen are no exception. In fact, one great against swordsmen is to have the damage needed to deal with the counters: archers, cavalry, and infantry units.

Now, let's move on to siege. We'll start by looking at the RAM. They have very high armor against ranged units, also called pierce armor. So infantry and cavalry are great choices against them. Rams, in fact, take three extra damage from any melee unit. So even villagers can work fairly well. You do want to be careful with villagers, only fight in an absolute emergency.

The next one that came up a lot when countering fast-moving infantry like Eagle warriors is controlling your units and dodging the incoming shots. Another really good counter is the bombard cannon, thanks to its longer range. So in practice, it can have a similar set of counters to the trebuchet. Basically, anything fast or the bombard cannon are all great choices.

Again, archers do very little damage because of the trebuchet armor against ranged attacks, while the bombard cannon is a bit unusual in that it does melee damage. In case you were wondering, archers are reasonably good against archers, and counter since they really need large numbers to be hard countered by onagers. Cavalry can do all right as long as the scorpions are in low numbers. But once they reach a critical mass, that can be very difficult to rush down. If you find yourself in that situation, onagers are really going to have a field day to wrap up the siege units.

When it comes to the bombard, they're weak to cavalry, which can close the distance quickly. In fact, against bombard cannons, deal with the units around it, since bombard cannons on their own are relatively easy to take down. The last, as I already said, light cavalry has both a resistance to conversion, as well as an attack bonus against them. Archers can be a good choice, and Eagle warriors also have some bonus resistance to conversions and some bonus damage of their own against monks, similar to light cavalry.

Despite monks being slow and having low necessarily a good choice, since they can be converted if the monk player has onagers. It's the main use of that technology and even more important than the ability to convert buildings. That said, fans of the Shilada warrior will probably disagree with me on that.

So those are all the basic types of land units and how to counter all of them. I realize that was a lot of information to throw at a new player. But if you can even remember one counter to each unit, unfortunately, another complicating factor to all of this is the armies tend to have more than just one unit. Often in team games, Age of Empires is a tough game to master because there are so many possibilities that can be going on. But for this one, though, thanks for watching.