Hey guys, Spirit of the Law here. Age of Empires 2 can be an intimidating game to learn. The moment the game begins, you already have to make decisions, from what to build to how to put your best foot forward. It might even feel overwhelming, but really, the first 15 or so villagers on land maps should always do roughly the same things in the same order every time.

There is one exception: nearly every build order starts the same way for a reason. And for this video, I want to show not just how they all start, but more importantly, show you why. To start the game, you want to queue up villagers and build two houses – one of them with two villagers, usually the ones closest together, and the other with one villager. Just a tip: use hotkeys to make these things happen as quickly as possible.

Now, one of these houses is incredibly important, and maybe surprisingly, it's the one with two villagers. Why? Because as soon as a villager comes out of the town center, we'll be at 5 out of 5 – a house is built. Now, a villager takes 25 seconds to make, and coincidentally, a house takes 25 seconds to build. But we queued up the villager first, and the builders need to walk to the house. We can make it in time – two builders working together can make a house, avoiding hitting the housing cap, which is being housed already, 25 seconds into the game.

Now, there are a few civilization exceptions here. One is the Mayans, who start with an extra villager, putting you at 5 out of 5 for your housing cap at the beginning. In that case, you want to get Loom right away while you build the first houses. Another exception is the Chinese, who start with no food. In that case, you really want to prioritize getting food as quickly as possible and also picking up Loom to keep the town center busy.

Another odd case is the Hans. Going back to our generic civilization, done with the first house, and the first villager comes out, you already have sheep. At least, on the notice in all build orders is, after our houses, we put villagers on sheep until we have six. Now, the reason for this is simple: we want to keep the town center working constantly. Villagers cost 250 food and take 25 seconds to train. After that, you can expect them to generate somewhere around 20 of whatever resource within two and a half minutes. Any villager you create in Dark Age should have paid for itself, and there's an amazing return on investment. So, we want a lot of them. Any villager we make in the Dark Age will pay for itself twelve times. A general rule: somewhere between half and two-thirds of your maximum population space available should be villagers. We keep making them until we have more than a hundred.

Now, the reason for six on sheep and not four or five is because constantly creating villagers takes 120 food per minute. An individual shepherd averages a little over nineteen food per minute over time, which means, with six shepherds, we almost have enough to keep up villagers continuously. You might think that implies we need seven, but what saves us here is we have a bit of time before the sixth shepherd comes out where we can build a bit of a buffer. By one minute and 15 seconds, as the sixth villager comes out, our last starting shepherd should have gathered somewhere between fifty and seventy more, trickling into our stockpile as they hit their maximum carry limit of ten.

Now, having collected but not yet dropped off resources, I want to make a quick note here about force-dropping off food resources. You need to do it so you grab your villagers and manually task them to drop off food at the town center and then tell them to go back to work. This is unavoidable sometimes, especially if you're to avoid doing it too much for a couple of reasons. First of all, of course, you'd want what you need, and this is just going to increase that deficit. The other problem is that once you force drop off, you can get stuck having to do that for every villager, even if these six shepherds did manage to collect the full 50 food needed by the time the newest villager comes out. That would hold ten; you have to help them out by doing it manually. The point is, if you have to, you can force-drop off to keep avoiding early on. If possible, it's an idea to queue up your sheep by holding down shift and clicking them in the order you want them to be eaten. That way, the villagers quickly and automatically move from one to the next. And if you find the sheep relatively fast, you should be able to get by without forcing shepherds to drop off early.

Now, I say a couple of odd cases. I want to quickly point out first of all, Britons have 25% faster shepherds, so five of their shepherds are actually better than most civilizations with six because of that. Stick with five. Again, Chinese also have a bit of a weird start with their three; it's uncommon to put seven on sheep for the first little bit because six production and having to force drop off constantly is ideal. Another odd case is the Aztecs, who have five extra carry capacity more often. Simply because they new to the game idle time is going to occur. We do know what a good investment. Minimize it as much as possible.

So, to recap: normally, we start with two houses, and then six on sheep. With that, we have our food income stabilized for the time being and have a new concern: wood. At some point, the map is gifting us, so we want to take it, but we also want enough wood income to be able to make houses and camps for all the villagers we make in the future. Ninety-nine percent of build orders at this point send villagers to wood, and the first villager is going to make a lumber camp at a safe, nearby woodland. Now, you might wonder why the center that's much closer. The reason is to save those four villagers so that we have enough wood to build them. Having those future farmers chop what we call these straggler trees gives those villagers something to do around the town center while they wait for the wood for a farm. It might also happen to help them build that farm sooner. Anyway, not that big of a deal, but once we have a lumber camp up against a nearby treeline, how many do we put on wood?

Well, the next villager is going to lure a boar, and then the one after is going to make a house and a mill. For most civilizations, we should have 50 wood at the moment after our camp, and we need to get to 125. If we put three on wood, then we should have about a hundred in total as that twelfth villager comes out to make the house and mill. Though not necessarily all of that wood will be dropped off by the time we build the next house, we'll have far more than with the exception of maybe a few aggressive strategies. Four Lumberjacks is the standard. Now, water maps are a little different. Of course, costs wood, but for this, Lumberjacks giving us ten villagers in nice to have two lumberjacks or lumber. Each other efficiency though, remember, we can get away with just three at this point. Conventionally, you send the next one perfectly. Your six shepherds will usually be partway through the fourth sheep, and the timing should be fairly clean so that the boar comes in roughly fine to take the fifth sheep. To avoid it, I keep mentioning it, but our shepherds, our food demands need something that collects a little faster if we want to not just keep up villagers but actually start accumulating the 500 food to advance, which the board happens to be collection rate as that lure is happening.

The next villager coming out is our house and mill builder. This can actually be a bit of a stressful moment as you want to not let the boar kill prevent these shepherds from killing another sheep just as the boar comes in. And you also want the next villager to head in the direction of the berries and make a house – all of this while trying to keep up Town Center production and maybe going on. In this moment, the most important thing is to not lose the villager to the boar and garrison if things look dicey. Again, villagers pay for themselves twelve times every half hour. So, losing a villager at this point is a huge loss in the long run and far more important than any of the other things going on.

After the boar lure and the house, as the next villager comes out, you should have far more than enough wood for the mill, especially if you have four on wood. Again, with three on wood, this part can be a bit tight, and sometimes you have to make the mill after collecting berries, force-dropping off any Lumberjacks, in order to make that happen sooner. You then want to send villagers to berries until you have four or five. At this point, our seven on boar should be giving us way more than we need to keep up. How many we have on berries the map is giving us and making sure to have 500 food at least when we want to advance.

A lot of scouting and also some force-dropping off with the boar because hunters carry a lot of food. Also, as villagers go to berries, generally at some either with a new villager being created or by sending one of the current boar hunters and then replacing it with the to do it. But the general rule is you want to go and get the second boar when the first one has around 150 or so food left. At this point, we're past the 15-minute mark, and the most general rule would be to put more on food at this point so you can advance quickly. Other strategies might call for wood; either way, just make sure to keep queuing up villagers and to pick up loom before going to Feudal Age.

Now, all this being and more advanced tricks that you can learn, but in my experience, this is the most standard way to start with the first 15 villagers for just about any strategy. In fact, up to this point, you might not even know what strategy this video gives you an idea of why a lot of these conventions have become the next time.